.TH DOW 1 "2026-07-11" "dow 2.2.0" "Drift Observation Workbench"
.SH NAME
dow \- track how your AI's behavior changes across versions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dow
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Drift Observation Workbench \- track how your AI's behavior changes across versions.
.PP
Versioning is automatic and Git is a hidden storage backend; you never run git commands. The tool runs fully offline by default.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS init
.B dow init [OPTIONS] [NAME]
.PP
Scaffold a new inference spec (and evals.py) so you can start versioning.
.PP
Creates specs/<name>.yaml from a starter template and, if it does not exist yet,
an evals.py with a couple of example evaluators. Pass a name to choose the spec
(the default is 'summarization'); the spec's name and the file are kept in sync.
Edit the spec to describe your prompt, model, sampling, and evaluation, then run
\&'dow commit' to capture v1. This only writes starter files \- there is no staging
area, index, or refs, and it refuses to overwrite an existing spec.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B NAME
Name for the new spec (creates specs/<name>.yaml).
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow init
dow init chatbot
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS commit
.B dow commit [OPTIONS] [SPEC]
.PP
Run your spec and capture its behavior as a new version.
.PP
Executes every input in the spec and stores the outputs together with the full
runtime capture \- model identity and version, sampling settings, and the resolved
prompt \- as an automatically named version (v1, v2, ...). Run 'dow init' first to
scaffold a spec. Configured evaluators run automatically, and
re\-committing an unchanged spec measures non\-determinism. Use \-\-from to branch from
an earlier version.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B SPEC
Spec file or name (optional).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-message, \-m
Short note for this version.
.TP
.B \-\-from
Branch from an earlier version instead of the latest.
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow commit
dow commit \-m "lower temperature"
dow commit \-\-from v1
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS compare
.B dow compare [OPTIONS] [A] [B]
.PP
Compare two versions: outputs, drift, stability, and a verdict.
.PP
Reports which configuration fields differ, how much the outputs changed, the
built\-in drift between the two versions (lexical with the default hashing
embedder; semantic when embedding_model names a sentence\-transformers or OpenAI
model), the stability of each, and an overall verdict against the spec's
thresholds. With no arguments, compares the previous version against the latest.
.PP
If the spec lists evaluation.comparators (your own paired metrics \- agreement or
reliability coefficients that need both versions aligned per item through their
captured payload), their results are shown beneath the built\-in signals. dow
ships none of these coefficients; it only wires in the callables you reference.
.PP
If the spec sets evaluation.embedding_model to 'none' (outputs are not text), the
built\-in output\-difference, drift, stability, and verdict are omitted; the
configuration difference and your own comparators carry the comparison instead.
.PP
With \-\-plot, the spec's evaluation.plots functions render the comparison and dow
stores the figures they produce as content\-addressed artifacts (dow ships no
plotting library). To aggregate more than two versions at once, use 'dow aggregate';
to follow a metric across the whole history, use 'dow trend'.
.PP
For sweeps and CI, \-\-fail\-on\-regression exits non\-zero when the verdict is a likely
regression, and \-\-fail\-on\-drift trips on behavior drift or worse. With
embedding_model 'none' the built\-in verdict is null and never trips \- gate on a
project metric with 'dow eval \-\-metric NAME \-\-min/\-\-max' instead.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B A
First version (default: previous).
.TP
.B B
Second version (default: latest).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.TP
.B \-\-plot
Also run the spec's plot functions and store the figures.
.TP
.B \-\-fail\-on\-regression
Exit non\-zero if the verdict is a likely regression (for sweeps/CI).
.TP
.B \-\-fail\-on\-drift
Exit non\-zero if the verdict is behavior drift or worse (stricter gate).
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow compare
dow compare v1 v3
dow compare good last
dow compare v1 v2 \-\-plot
dow compare good last \-\-fail\-on\-regression
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS aggregate
.B dow aggregate [OPTIONS] [VERSIONS]
.PP
Aggregate reliability metrics over a cohort of versions (N\-way).
.PP
Where 'dow compare' contrasts exactly two versions, 'dow aggregate' runs your own
N\-way aggregators over a whole cohort \- K seeds, judges, prompt wordings, or
clustering permutations \- selected by an explicit list of versions, a \-\-tag, or
(by default) the spec's entire history. Each aggregator receives every member
aligned per item through its captured payload, which is what a reliability
coefficient over K raters needs (ICC, Fleiss/Gwet, Krippendorff's alpha, ...). dow
ships none of the coefficients; it only wires in the callables you list under
evaluation.aggregators.
.PP
With \-\-plot, the spec's evaluation.plots functions are run over the aggregated
results and dow stores each figure they produce as a content\-addressed artifact.
dow ships no plotting library \- you plug in your own plot functions.
.PP
Each run is saved as a durable, git\-tracked result bundle (aggregator values +
figure references + provenance); list them with \-\-list and print one with
\-\-show <id>, so a robustness check becomes a citable, reproducible object.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B VERSIONS
Cohort members to aggregate (default: every version).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.TP
.B \-\-tag, \-t
Use every version carrying this tag as the cohort.
.TP
.B \-\-plot
Also run the spec's plot functions and store the figures.
.TP
.B \-\-list
List stored aggregation bundles instead of running one.
.TP
.B \-\-show
Print a stored aggregation bundle by id (e.g. a1).
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow aggregate
dow aggregate v1 v2 v3 \-\-plot
dow aggregate \-\-tag seed
dow aggregate \-\-list
dow aggregate \-\-show a1
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS suite
.B dow suite [OPTIONS] [NAME]
.PP
Aggregate versions across several specs (a cross\-spec matrix).
.PP
Where 'dow aggregate' runs your N\-way aggregators over a cohort of versions within
ONE spec, 'dow suite' runs them over versions drawn from SEVERAL specs \- the
check x model x domain x temperature matrix. You declare the participating specs
and the project's aggregators/plots in a manifest, specs/<name>.suite.yaml:
.PP
name: robustness_matrix
  specs: [prompt_sensitivity, seed_sensitivity]
  select: all            # all | latest | <tag>
  evaluation:
    aggregators: [suite_evals.py:agg_matrix]
    plots: [suite_evals.py:plot_matrix]
.PP
Each member keeps its own captured config (so your aggregator can bucket by spec,
model, domain, or temperature) and payload (aligned per item). Member ids are
\&'spec:version'. Selection is 'all' (every version of each spec \- the full matrix),
\&'latest' (each spec's latest), or a tag name (every version carrying it). Override
per run with \-\-select. dow ships none of the coefficients or the plotting library;
it only wires the members into the callables you list under evaluation.aggregators
and evaluation.plots.
.PP
With \-\-plot, the suite's plot functions run over the aggregated results and dow
stores each figure as a content\-addressed artifact. Each run is saved as a durable,
git\-tracked suite bundle; list them with \-\-list and print one with \-\-show <id>, so
a whole robustness matrix becomes a citable, reproducible object.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B NAME
Suite manifest name (specs/<name>.suite.yaml).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-select
Override selection: all | latest | <tag>.
.TP
.B \-\-plot
Also run the suite's plot functions and store the figures.
.TP
.B \-\-list
List stored suite bundles instead of running one.
.TP
.B \-\-show
Print a stored suite bundle by id (e.g. a1).
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow suite robustness_matrix
dow suite robustness_matrix \-\-plot
dow suite robustness_matrix \-\-select latest
dow suite robustness_matrix \-\-select golden
dow suite robustness_matrix \-\-list
dow suite robustness_matrix \-\-show a1
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS trend
.B dow trend [OPTIONS]
.PP
Trend a metric across a spec's whole version history (tree\-aware).
.PP
Where 'dow compare' contrasts exactly two versions, 'dow trend' follows a metric
across ALL versions in commit order, so a slow drift over many iterations \- not
just the last hop \- is visible. It reports every version's value together with the
change since the previous version and since the baseline (v1), and labels each hop
as a baseline, a same\-config re\-run, or a config change (the same tree awareness as
\&'dow history').
.PP
Two kinds of metric are trended: the built\-in text stability (when the spec embeds
output text) and your own evaluator scores saved under evaluation.metrics. With no
\-\-metric, every numeric metric found is shown; pass \-\-metric NAME to focus on one.
dow computes no new numbers here \- it only lines up the ones already recorded.
.PP
With \-\-plot, the spec's evaluation.plots functions receive the trend series (kind
\&'trend') and dow stores the figures they produce as content\-addressed artifacts
(dow ships no plotting library).
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-metric, \-m
Metric to trend (default: every numeric metric).
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.TP
.B \-\-plot
Also run the spec's plot functions and store the figures.
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow trend
dow trend \-\-metric stability
dow trend \-m accuracy \-\-plot
dow trend \-\-spec prompt_sensitivity \-m krippendorff_alpha
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS explain
.B dow explain [OPTIONS] [A] [B]
.PP
Explain why behavior changed between two versions (causal attribution).
.PP
Pairs the measured drift and stability change with the exact spec fields that
differ between the versions. If more than one field changed at once, the result
is flagged as confounded, since no single cause can be isolated. Defaults to the
previous version versus the latest.
.PP
Any evaluation.comparators declared in the spec (your own paired metrics \- e.g.
agreement or reliability coefficients over the two versions' aligned payloads)
are shown beneath the attribution, so you see how far each coefficient moved \-
with its confidence interval \- alongside the single field that caused it. dow
ships none of these coefficients; it only runs the callables you reference.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B A
First version (default: previous).
.TP
.B B
Second version (default: latest).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow explain
dow explain v1 v2
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS history
.B dow history [OPTIONS]
.PP
List captured versions and their stability.
.PP
Shows every version in order with its stability score and any tags, and marks
whether your current working spec matches an existing version or is new since the
last commit.
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow history
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS inspect
.B dow inspect [OPTIONS] [VERSION]
.PP
Show one version's spec, runtime capture, outputs, tags, and eval scores.
.PP
Prints the full versioned specification, the runtime capture (model, version,
sampling, resolved prompt), the generated outputs, any tags, and saved evaluation
scores. Defaults to the latest version; accepts a version name, last/prev, or a tag.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B VERSION
Version to show (default: latest).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow inspect
dow inspect v2
dow inspect good
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS tag
.B dow tag [OPTIONS] LABEL [VERSION]
.PP
Tag a version with a free\-form label (good, golden, baseline, ...).
.PP
Labels work anywhere a version is accepted \- inspect, compare, eval, and so on.
The 'good' label additionally marks the known\-good baseline that 'dow eval'
compares against. Defaults to tagging the latest version.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B LABEL
Free\-form label, e.g. good, golden, baseline, bad.
.TP
.B VERSION
Version to tag (default: latest).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow tag good
dow tag baseline v1
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS eval
.B dow eval [OPTIONS] [VERSION]
.PP
Run custom evaluators on a version; compare to the previous and last\-good versions.
.PP
Executes the metrics declared under evaluation.metrics and reports each score next
to the previous version and the most recent version tagged 'good', so regressions
stand out. Results are saved with the version and reused unless \-\-rerun is passed;
evaluators also run automatically on 'dow commit'.
.PP
Use \-\-draft to evaluate your current working spec without committing a version:
edit the spec, run 'dow eval \-\-draft' to see the scores against the previous and
last\-good versions, iterate, and run 'dow commit' when you are happy with it.
.PP
Evaluators score one version on its own. Their paired counterpart \-
evaluation.comparators, which score one version against another (agreement or
reliability coefficients) \- run instead on 'dow compare' and 'dow explain'. For
agreement over a whole cohort of versions at once (K seeds/judges/wordings), use
evaluation.aggregators with 'dow aggregate'. Plot functions listed under
evaluation.plots turn any of these results into figures dow stores as artifacts.
.PP
For sweeps and CI, gate on a score: \-\-metric NAME with \-\-min and/or \-\-max exits
non\-zero when that metric is out of range (or missing). This works with \-\-draft too,
so a sweep can reject a bad working spec before committing it.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B VERSION
Version to evaluate (default: latest).
.RE
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-rerun
Re\-run evaluators even if results are saved.
.TP
.B \-\-draft
Evaluate the current working spec without committing a version.
.TP
.B \-\-good\-tag
Tag that marks the known\-good baseline.
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.TP
.B \-\-metric, \-m
Metric to gate on with \-\-min/\-\-max (for sweeps/CI).
.TP
.B \-\-min
Fail (exit non\-zero) if \-\-metric is below this value.
.TP
.B \-\-max
Fail (exit non\-zero) if \-\-metric is above this value.
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow eval
dow eval \-\-draft
dow eval v2 \-\-rerun
dow eval \-\-good\-tag golden
dow eval \-\-metric accuracy \-\-min 0.8
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS tree
.B dow tree [OPTIONS]
.PP
Visualize how behavior evolves across versions.
.PP
Renders the version lineage as a tree \- the main line as a vertical trunk, with
branches created by 'dow commit \-\-from' off to the side \- annotating each step with
its drift and stability change. Use \-\-mermaid for a Mermaid gitGraph, or \-o FILE to
write it to a Markdown file you can preview.
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-spec, \-s
(no description)
.TP
.B \-\-mermaid
Output a Mermaid diagram instead of a terminal tree.
.TP
.B \-\-output, \-o
Write the Mermaid diagram to a Markdown file.
.RE
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
dow tree
dow tree \-o evolution.md
.fi
.RE
.PP
.SS help
.B dow help [OPTIONS] [COMMAND]
.PP
Show detailed help for dow or one command (e.g. 'dow help commit').
.PP
With no argument, lists every command. With a command name, prints that
command's full description, arguments, options, and usage examples.
.PP
Arguments:
.RS
.TP
.B COMMAND
Command to explain in detail, e.g. 'commit'. Omit for the overview.
.RE
.PP
.SS man
.B dow man [OPTIONS]
.PP
Output dow's manual page in roff format, or install it so 'man dow' works.
.PP
With no options, prints the man page to stdout \- redirect it to a file or pipe it
into 'man \-l \-'. With \-\-install, writes dow.1 into a man1 directory on your MANPATH
(by default ~/.local/share/man/man1) so that 'man dow' renders the full documentation.
.PP
Options:
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-install
Write the page to a man directory so 'man dow' works.
.TP
.B \-\-dir
Target man1 directory (default: ~/.local/share/man/man1).
.RE
.PP
.SH BACKENDS
The model sits behind one provider interface, chosen by \fBmodel.provider\fR in the spec. dow runs fully offline by default.
.RS
.TP
.B mock
Deterministic offline mock (default); no network or API keys.
.TP
.B python
A local Python callable (path.py:function); version your own generator offline.
.TP
.B openai
OpenAI hosted models; set OPENAI_API_KEY.
.TP
.B ollama
Local Ollama runtime at http://localhost:11434.
.TP
.B vllm
A vLLM OpenAI-compatible server, local or remote. Set VLLM_BASE_URL (default http://localhost:8000/v1) and, if the server requires it, VLLM_API_KEY.
.RE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
Run \fBdow help\fR or \fBdow help \fICOMMAND\fR for interactive help.
